Supplementary Information: Genetic similarity between relatives (...)                                14

2.1 Genetic variance across generations

Supplementary Figure 5 Unstandardized path diagram of genetic inheritance under assortative mating.

Because assortative mating will change genetic variance before equilibrium, we can no longer assume unit variances as we
did in the previous note. Supplementary Figure 5 therefore uses explicit variance components. This changes how we
derive correlations, because tracing all valid chains between two variables will give us the covariance, not the correlation.
To turn a covariance into a correlation, we need to divide by the geometric mean of the two variables' variances. To find
the variances, we must trace all valid chains leading from the two variables back to themselves.

      (, )                                                                                           (2.1)
() × ()

To understand the correlation between relatives under disequilibrium, we must therefore first understand how the
variance changes. The equations for changes in genetic variance across generations are available elsewhere13-15, but because
we will be extending the model to see how gene-environment correlations and the use of polygenic indices affects this
process, it will be useful to re-derive them from first principles using path analysis.

We let  denote the number of prior generations of assortative mating, where  = 0 is the generation where partners first
match on the phenotype. Note that this would imply that partners in generation  = 1 (the first generation after
assortment began) would be the second generation to assort on the phenotype. Supplementary Figure 5 shows a mother-
father-offspring trio (subscripted , , and , respectively) where the parents are in generation . The genetic variance
in generation  is denoted (), and the recombination variance is denoted . The recombination variance will depend
on the genetic variance in the base population ( = 0, before assortative mating) and will be13-16:

                                           =  (0)                                                    (2.2)
                                                2
Supplementary Information: Genetic similarity between relatives (...)                15

The genetic and environmental effects are for simplicity's sake assumed to be constant across generations and therefore
set to 1. We are also assuming that the environmental variance, denoted , is constant across generations, and that there
are no sex differences. If you want to relax these assumptions, you can replace them by appropriate parameters (e.g.,
()) and redo the path tracing with these changes.

As always, the heritability in generation  is the proportion of phenotypic variance attributable to genetic variance:

               2()                                       =     ()                    (2.3)
                                                            () +

The partner similarity is slightly more complicated because the copath coefficient is neither the covariance nor the
correlation between partners when variances are not equal to one. Instead, it is a special coefficient denoting the strength
of assortment. Because we have already defined  as the phenotypic correlation, the assortment strength in generation 
is now denoted  to avoid confusion. We can use path tracing to find the phenotypic partner correlation:

     =  (() + )2                                               =   ( ()     +   )    (2.4)
           () + 

We can apply similar logic to the genotypic correlation between partners:

        ()        =                                       2 ()    =    ()            (2.5)
                                                          ()

Because heritability will change across generations, all else being equal, so will the genotypic correlation between partners
­ even when keeping the phenotypic correlation constant. Note also that we can transform Equation (S2.5) using
Equation (S2.3) and Equation (S2.4) and find that () = 2(), thus matching Equation (1) in the main paper.
Finally, to keep  constant while  increases,  will have to decrease accordingly. It is an open question whether it is
more realistic to keep  or  constant when investigating assortative mating across generations, but here we follow
previous work and let  be constant6,13. This does not affect the equations, but it would change the resulting figures
somewhat.

We are now ready to derive the genetic variance in the offspring generation. We do that by tracing all paths leading from
 back to itself:

              ( + 1) = ()

=    +  ()        +                                      ()    +  2()    +   2 ()
          4                                                4          4         4

           =      +                                      ()    1  +  ()              (2.6)
                                                                      2

If we substitute (S2.2) and (S2.5) into (S2.6), we get:

(       +  1)  =  (0)                                       +  ()     1  +     ()    (2.7)
                    2                                                (      2     )

This equation matches what is reported in other sources13-15.
Supplementary Information: Genetic similarity between relatives (...)                                  16

We will also define the intergenerational genetic variance ratio, (), as we will refer to that later:

()  =  ( + 1)                                                                                          (2.8)
         ()

To see how genetic variance changes across generations under different scenarios, we apply Equation (S2.7) recurrently.
In Supplementary Figure 6, we see how the genetic variance () increases in successive generations of assortative mating
following Equation (S2.7) for three different phenotypic partner correlations. All three example assume that the
heritability is 50% in the base population, and that the genetic variance starts at unit variance (0) = 1. Panel A shows
how the variance increases asymptotically towards equilibrium (indicated by the dashed grey lines), and Panel B shows
the intergeneration variance ratio (). Overall, variance increases in the initial generations of assortment before reaching
equilibrium after between 6 to 10 generations, practically speaking, depending on assortment strength. Larger partner
correlations lead to more generations in disequilibrium in part because increased genetic variance leads to increased
heritability (all else equal), which in turn leads to an increased genotypic correlation between partners, which in turn
increases the variance further.

Supplementary Figure 6 Genetic variance in successive generations of assortative mating.

Note that we can simplify Equation (S2.7) further if we are interested in the first generation of assortment, where
() = (0), or the equilibrium variance, where () = ( + 1) = ():

(1) = (0) (1 + 2(0))                                                                                   (2.9)

()  =  1  (0)                                                                                          (2.9)
          - ()

These simplifications match equations reported elsewhere4,13.
Supplementary Information: Genetic similarity between relatives (...)  17

2.2 Gene-environment correlations during disequilibrium

 Supplementary Figure 7 This path diagram adapts Supplementary Figure 5 by also adding cultural and phenotypic transmission
  (in addition to genetic transmission). Under disequilibrium, the environmental variance, (), and gene-environment covariance,

                    (), will change across generations too, necessitating generation-specific notation for these as well.

In Supplementary Figure 7, the offspring environment are caused by various factors. Most importantly, there are causal
effects from the parental environments (denoted , coloured red) and from the parental phenotypes (denoted , coloured
teal). Note that these are unstandardized effects and will depend on the variance of the parental environment and
phenotype respectively. There are also two sources of environmental variance that are not shared between parents and
offspring:  indicates environmental variance shared by siblings (not drawn), and  denotes environmental variance
unique to the individual. Both of those are for simplicity assumed to be constant across generations.

As we saw in Note 1.2, environmental transmission will induce gene-environment correlations, especially when coupled
with assortative mating. Because we have already defined  as the gene-environment correlation, Supplementary Figure
7 uses () to denote the gene-environment covariance in generation .

                                                   Genetic variance

Supplementary Figure 6 assumed that similarity between offspring was entirely attributed to genetic transmission. What
if there were environmental transmission as well? If this is the case, then the equations for the resulting variances and
gene-environment correlations become quite complicated, in part because the environmental variance and gene-
environment covariance will also change across generations (which is why they have generation-specific notation in
Supplementary Figure 7). However, as we shall see, the genetic variance in generation  + 1 is still just a function of the
genetic variance and the genotypic partner correlation in the preceding generation. In other words, gene-environment
correlations will, just as during equilibrium, mimic the effect of higher heritability. Let us start by tracing the genotypic
correlation between partners (i.e., the genotypic covariance divided by the genetic variance):
